HTML Email Basics

Best Practices: Design

Emails should be 600-800 pixels maximum width. This will make them behave better within 
the preview-pane size provided by many clients. Design for simplicity. Use grid-based 
layers and avoid complicated elements that require HTML floats or positioning.
Assume images will be initially blocked by email clients, or that certain images, background-images
for example, will completely fail to load.
Don't design an email that's essentially one large, sliced-up image. While these kinds of 
emails look pretty, they perform poorly.
Use basic, cross-platform fonts such as Arial, Verdana, Georgia, and Times New Roman.
Avoid elements that require Flash or JavaScript. If you need motion in an email, a .gif is your best bet.
Don't forget about the mobile experience! Is your email readable at arms length on a small screen? 
Will the images slow its load time on a mobile device? Are your links easy to press with a thumb?

Best Practices: Development
Much like with design, there are best practices to follow when coding HTML email.

>Code all structure using the table element. For more complicated layouts, you should nest tables 
to build complex structures.
Use element attributes (such as cellpadding, valign, and width) to set table dimensions.
This forces a box-model structure. Keep your CSS simple. Avoid compound style declarations
 (IE: &ldquo;font:#000 12px Arial, Helvetica, sans-serif;), shorthand code (IE: #000 instead of #000000), 
 CSS layout properties (IE: slot, position, clear, visibility, etc.), complex selectors 
 (IE: descendant, child or sibling selectors, and pseudo-elements)
Inline all CSS before sending. Use only absolute links for images, and host those images on a 
reliable server. Don't bother with JavaScript or Flash—those technologies are largely unsupported 
by email clients. Account for mobile-friendliness, if possible. Use media queries to increase text 
sizes on small screens, provide thumb-sized (~46x46px) hit areas for links. Make an email 
responsive if the design allows for it. Test, test, test. Create email accounts across various 
services, and send emails to yourself.